doc(spec): formatted ORAS CLI output (#1199)
oras-project/oras: docs/proposals/formatted-output.md

### Scripting

Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate some routine workflow in containers secure supply chain scenario, she wants the machine to get the image digest from the JSON output objects that are emitted by `oras push`, then use utility like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output, then attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REG/$REPO:$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command, finally sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the SBOM file's reference (`$REG/$REPO:$DIGEST`) outputted from the last step.

```shell
oras push $REG/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Reference}}' |\
xargs -I _ oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example _ sbom.spdx --format '{{.Reference}}' |\
xargs -I _ notation sign _ 

> ```

Reviewer: Extended arguments utility(xarg) is only available on *nix platforms. We also need to add PowerShell commands (like `ConvertTo-Json`）for Windows platform?

Author: I will add PowerShell command example for Windows platform

Reviewer 2: I would recommend minimizing being dependent on any external tools, like `xargs` and instead provide as much tooling integrated with the tool

Author: Agree with @sabre1041 . I will add another sample commands for using environmental variables here.

Author: Added another two samples for using environmental variables and [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json)  Windows PowerShell in this scenario,

### CI/CD

Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain multiple ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |
          oras pull $REG/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.Files[0].Path}}' |\

>           xargs -I _ docker import _

Reviewer: NIT: can be simplified:
```suggestion
          xargs docker import
```

```

> ## Proposal: support formatting output as JSON

Reviewer: The second bullet point is not related to JSON, but avoid it in the title.
```suggestion
## Proposal: format output into structured data
```

- Use the `--format json` flag to change the default human-readable prettified output to machine-readable raw JSON. 
- Use the `--format` with Go template to custom the output fields.

## Use cases

### oras pull 

Pull an artifact and display its metadata as formatted JSON in standard output. The following fields should be formatted in a JSON output:

> - `reference`: reference of the image manifest uses in the `oras pull` command

Reviewer: I think we should use `artifact` instead of `image` and user won't need to know if it's pointing to an artifact or artifact manifest.
```suggestion
- `reference`: full artifact reference by digest
```

-  `files`: Pulled layer 
    -  mediaType: media type of the pulled file (layer). 
    -  digest: digest of the pulled file (layer) 

>     -  size: file size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -  size: file size in bytes
```

    -  annotations: annotations of the pulled file (layer)
    -  path: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)

>     -  reference: reference of the pulled file (layer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -  reference: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)
```

```shell
$ oras pull $REG/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}
```

```json
{
    "reference": "$REG/$REPO:$DIGEST",
    "files" : [
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
            },
            "path":"path1/artifact1.json"
            "reference": "$REG/$REPO:$layer0_digest"
        }
    ]
}
```

Pull an artifact and display its metadata as raw JSON in standard output.

```shell

> $ oras pull $REG/$REPO:$TAG --format raw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oras pull $REG/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```

```

> {"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:b9f828d08dfc58612c2589cfa3ab8672dd6c9ffcbd9e56c591093b076a6ea499","size":12,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"hello.txt"},"artifactType":"application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1","reference":"$REG/$REPO:$digest"}

Reviewer: The JSON displayed here doesn't match what's described above.

  "artifactReference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
  "manifests": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42",
      "size": 731,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-11-22T07:27:41Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "reference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42"
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c",
      "size": 731,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-11-22T10:32:54Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "reference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c"
    }
  ]
}
```

### oras manifest fetch

```shell
oras manifest fetch $REG/$REPO:$TAG --format {{.Layers[0].Reference}}
```

> ```json

Author: The JSON output schema of `oras manifest fetch` will only support [OCI image manifest](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md#image-manifest), image index is not supported in this release

      - run: |
          oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.Files[0].Path}}' |\
          docker import _
```

## Proposal: format output into structured data

- Use the `--format json` flag to change the default human-readable prettified output to machine-readable raw JSON. Users can still use `--format '{{jsonPretty .}}'` to get prettified output for some commands.
- Use the `--format` with Go template to custom the output fields. 

## Use cases

### oras pull 

Pull an artifact and display its metadata as formatted JSON in standard output. The following fields should be formatted in a JSON output:

- `reference`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO:$DIGEST`
-  `files`: a list of downloaded files
    -  mediaType: media type of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  digest: digest of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  size: file size in bytes
    -  annotations: annotations of the pulled file (layer)
    -  path: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)
    -  reference: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)

Pull a single file and show the manifest of the pulled file as pretty JSON in standard output:

```shell

> $ oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{ toPrettyJson .}}"
```

Reviewer: BTW if it's a shell code block, you can remove the prefix `$ `

    "size": 12,
    "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
    },
    "artifactType" : "example/sbom",
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$digest"
}
```

### oras push

Push an artifact to a repository and show the metadata of the pushed artifact.

```shell
$ oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{jsonPretty .}}'
```

```json
{
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
    "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
    "size": 12,
    "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "hello.txt"
    },
    "artifactType": "application/vnd.example+type",
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$digest"
}
```

### oras discover

Discover an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```shell
$ oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1
```

```
localhost:5000/hello/demo@sha256:04beb34cd24389147b4642a828b47fabefa722dea794dc3834567cf014ab0fe6
└── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
    ├── sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42
    ├── sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c
```

> Discover an artifact's referrers manifest in JSON. Consider `oras discover` is more likely used by terminal (human) than machine, the default formatted output with `--format json` should be pretty JSON.

Reviewer: It is possible to support `--format json|table|tree|$TEMPLATE`. In that case, `--format` can covers all usages of  `--output` and we should consider deprecating `--output`.

I suggest in the release we introduce `--format` (planned v1.2.0)
1) add a deprecate mark to `--output` flag in the help doc
2) If user use `--output json|table|tree`, we print a warning in stderr to suggest them to use `--format json|table|tree` instead
3) deprecate `--output` in v2.0

Author: > Also --output should be in v2.0
Do you mean deprecate ` --output` should be in ORAS v2.0?

Author: Added a note about the deprecation of the `--output` flag in v1.2.0

  "artifactReference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
  "manifests": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42",
      "size": 731,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-11-22T07:27:41Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "reference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42"
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c",
      "size": 630,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-11-25T10:32:54Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "reference": "localhost:5000/hello@sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c"
    }
  ]
}
```

### oras manifest fetch

Fetch a specified layer and show the formatted JSON of the fetched manifest in formatted JSON.

```shell

> oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format {{.Layers[0].Reference}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{(first .Layers).Reference}}'
```

```

```json
{
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$manifest_digest",
    "layers" : [
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
            },
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer0_digest",
        }
    ]
}
```

### Format the output using the given Go template

In order to custom the manifest fields in the output, format the output using the given [Go template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/). The keys of the returned JSON can be used as the values for the `--format` flag.

For example, push an artifact to a repository and show the `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```shell

> $ oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Reference}}', '{{.ArtifactType}}"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Reference}}, {{.ArtifactType}}"
```

> ```shell
> $ oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Reference}}', '{{.ArtifactType}}"
> ```
> 
> ```console
> "localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, "application/vnd.example+type"  
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
$ oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Reference}}, {{.ArtifactType}}"
localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, application/vnd.example+type
```
```

Author: Same as above

For example, pull a file and display the specified fields `mediaType`, `reference`, `size` of the pulled file in the standard output.

```shell
$ oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.MediaType}}, {{.Reference}}, {{.Size}}"
```

```console
"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d", 12
```

For example, get the specified annotation value of an artifact by the key name `org.opencontainers.image.created`, with the [index function](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template#pkg-functions) defined in Go template.

> ```shell
> $ oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format '{{index .Manifest.Annotations "org.opencontainers.image.created"}}'
> 
> ```
> 
> ```console
> "2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
> ```

Reviewer: Merging the command and result into a console code block would be a good option:
```suggestion
```shell
$ oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format '{{index .Manifest.Annotations "org.opencontainers.image.created"}}'
"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
```
```

Author: Same reason as above

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide a programming-friendly experience for developers who want to automate their workflows without needing to parse unstructured text.

## Guidance

Provide two major options to enable users to define the output format of ORAS commands:

- Use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem
- Use `--format` to format the output of ORAS commands into different data formats or enable process output data using the given Go template.
  - Use `--format json|tree|table` to print the output in prettified JSON, tree view, or table view
  - Use `--format '{{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }}'` to enable extract or compose the output data using Go template functions

See sample use cases of formatted output for `oras manifest fetch`:

- If user doesn't specify `--format` flag, the default output should be raw JSON data. This is the current behavior of `oras manifest fetch`.

- Use `--output <file>` and `--format` at the same time, a manifest file should be produced in the filesystem and the `mediaType` value should be outputted on the console:

> ```bash

Author: ```suggestion
```console
```

$ oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest.json --format {{.config.MediaType}}
application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
```

View the contents of the generated manifest within specified `sample-manifest.json` file. The contents should be raw JSON data:

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```console

$ cat sample-manifest.json
{"schemaVersion":2,"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","artifactType":"application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1","config":{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json","digest":"sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a","size":2,"data":"e30="},"layers":[{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65","size":14477,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"sbom.spdx"}},{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69","size":6639,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"scan-test-verify-image.json"}}],"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"}}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > `--output -` and `--format json` can not be used at the same time due to conflicts.

Author: ```suggestion
> `--output -` and `--format` can not be used at the same time due to conflicts.
```

## Desired user experience for proposal 1

For review convenience, this doc shows the output in most of the sample ORAS commands with prettified JSON format.

### oras pull 

Pull an artifact and display its metadata as formatted JSON in standard output. The following fields should be formatted in a JSON output:

- `ref`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`
-  `files`: a list of downloaded files
    -  `path`: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)
    -  `ref`: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)
    -  `mediaType`: media type of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  `digest`: digest of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  `size`: file size in bytes

Pull a single file and show the its descriptor data including `path` and `ref` as pretty JSON in standard output:

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'
```

```json
{
    "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST",
    "files" : [
            "path":"/home/user/path1/",
            "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@$layer0_digest",
            {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",

>             "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",

Author: Missing `annotations`

            "size": 12
            }

>         }

Author: Missing a `{`

```

Pull multiple files and show their descriptor data including `path` and `ref` as pretty JSON in standard output.

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'
```

```json
{
    "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST",
    "files" : [
        {
            "path":"path1/artifact1.json",
            "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer0_digest",
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
        },
        {
            "path":"path2/artifact2.json",
            "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer1_digest",
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:4add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c7",
            "size": 12,
        }
        }
    ]
}
```

### oras attach

Attach two files to an image and show the descriptor of the attached files in JSON format.

```bash
oras attach $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/sbom sbom.spdx --artifact-type example/vul-scan vul-report.json  --format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Why do we need to emit minified or condensed json in any of these. jq and other tools always prettify. I would vote for removing the option of toPrettyJson and and if we need minified json or raw introduce another option when needed.

Reviewer: If we output prettified JSON metadata by default, we don't need to introduce another option to minify it. It's already supported natively and user can use `--format '{{toRawJson .}}'`.

            },
            "artifactType": "application/vnd.example+type",
            "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST"
        },
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a27",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.title": "hello.txt"
            },
            "artifactType": "application/vnd.example+type",
            "ref": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST"
        }
    ]
}
```

### oras discover

Discover an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```bash
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1
```

```console
localhost:5000/hello/demo@sha256:04beb34cd24389147b4642a828b47fabefa722dea794dc3834567cf014ab0fe6
└── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
    ├── sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42
    ├── sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c
```

Discover an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON. 

```bash
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Consider removing the `toPrettyJson` function here. I think its ok to document that we can invoke the toPrettyJson but don't recommend it samples and I would just use --format json

Author: Removed '{{toPrettyJson .}}' from all samples of this Spec

For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.

- Use shell variables on Unix

```bash
REFERENCE_A=$(oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Ref}}')
REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.Ref}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```powershell

> $REFERENCE_A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
> $REFERENCE_B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A.Ref sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
> notation sign $REFERENCE_B.Ref

Reviewer: NIT: `ConvertFrom-Json` will produce an object containing the reference, suggest below changes 
```suggestion
$A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $A.Ref sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $B.Ref
```

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/sbom sbom.spdx  --artifact-type example/vul-scan vul-scan.json --format json
```

```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186111",
  "Files": [
    {
      "Path": "/home/user/oras-install/sbom.spdx",
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "Path": "/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json",
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "vul-scan.json"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > When pulling a folder to filesystem, the value of `Path` should be an absolute path of the folder. Other fields are the same as the example of pulling files as above.

Reviewer: How can user tell if a `Path` if a file or folder? Suggest to add `/` at the end of folder path.

Author: @qweeah That's a good point. I updated the Note to make it much strict and accurate.

When pulling a folder to filesystem, the value of `Path` should be an absolute path of the folder and should be end with slash `/` or backslash `\`, for example, `/home/Bob/sample-folder/` on Unix or `C:\Users\Bob\sample-folder\` on Windows. Other fields are the same as the example of pulling files as above.

## Scenarios

### Scripting

Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate some routine workflow in containers secure supply chain scenario, she wants the machine to get the image digest from the JSON output objects that are emitted by `oras push`, then use utility like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) or use environmental variables to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output, then attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO:$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command, finally sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the SBOM file's reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO:$DIGEST`) outputted from the last step.

- Use xargs utility on Unix

```shell

> oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Reference}}' |\

Author: Updated the field name "reference" to "ref" in this doc

xargs -I _ oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example _ sbom.spdx --format '{{.Reference}}' |\
xargs -I _ notation sign _ 
```

- Use environmental variables on Unix

> ```shell

Author: Is Bash in this example

> $REFERENCE_A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Reference}}'

Reviewer 4: Better to use the `$(command)` notation

> $REFERENCE_A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Reference}}'

Author: Fixed in the example

$REFERENCE_B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.Reference}}' 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConverFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```
$env:REFERENCE_A='oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json' --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$env:REFERENCE_B='oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A.Reference sbom.spdx --format json' --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $REFERENCE_B.Reference

> 

Author: Fixed

```

### CI/CD

Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain multiple ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output, then pass the pulled first layer to the second command `docker import` for further operation. 

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |
          oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.first .Files.Path}}' |\

>           docker import _

Author: Can we use `xargs` here?

>       - run: |
>           oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.first .Files.Path}}' |\
>           docker import _

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - run: |
          path=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.first .Files.Path}}'`
          docker import $path
```

```

## Proposal: format output into structured data

> 1. Use the `--format json` flag to change the default human-readable prettified output to machine-readable raw JSON. Users can still use `--format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'` to get prettified output for some commands.

Author: Yes. Updated

2. Use the `--format` with [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) to custom the output fields. 

## Desired user experience for proposal 1

For review convenience, this doc shows the output in most of the sample ORAS commands with prettified JSON format.

### oras pull 

Pull an artifact and display its metadata as formatted JSON in standard output. The following fields should be formatted in a JSON output:

- `reference`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO:$DIGEST`

> -  `files`: a list of downloaded files

Author: Would it be better to rename `files` to `layers`? `layers` should cover files and folders.

> -  `files`: a list of downloaded files

Author: We will keep using files because there is no layer concepts in the context of pulling artifact to file system.

    -  mediaType: media type of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  digest: digest of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  size: file size in bytes
    -  annotations: annotations of the pulled file (layer)

>     -  path: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)

Author: It should be absolution path. Updated to use absolution path in the example below

    -  reference: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)

Pull a single file and show the manifest of the pulled file as pretty JSON in standard output:

```shell

> oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Reviewer: If we display prettified JSON by default, we don't need this function. 

The most typical use case of `--format json` is to view the schema of output data, prettified output makes more sense since it's easier to read.

> oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Author: Fixed

> oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Author: @sajayantony 
This doc shows the output with prettified JSON format using `--format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'` is just for review convenience. It will be much readable. 

This is one of the function in standard Go template. Users can choose to use this function only when they need to print out prettified JSON.

> oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Author: Removed `'{{toPrettyJson .}}'` from all of the samples

```

```json
{
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$DIGEST",
    "files" : [
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {

>                 "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"

Author: Removed annotations from layer

            },
            "path":"path1/artifact1.json"
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer0_digest"
        }
    ]
}
```

Pull an artifact and display its manifest as raw JSON in standard output.

```shell
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```
{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a2","size":12,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"},"path","path1/artifact1.json","reference":"$REGISTRY/$REPO:$digest"}

> ```

Author: Updated

> pull multiple files and show their manifests as pretty JSON in standard output.

Author: Yes. Updated

            },
            "path":"path1/artifact1.json"
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer0_digest"
        },
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:4add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c7",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-30T06:32:43Z"
            },
            "path":"path2/artifact2.json"
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$layer1_digest"
        }
    ]
}
```

### oras attach

Attach an artifact to an image and show the manifest of the attached file in JSON format.

```shell
oras attach --artifact-type example/sbom $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sbom.spdx --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}
```

```json
{
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
    "size": 12,
    "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
    },
    "artifactType" : "example/sbom",
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$digest"
}

> ```

Author: Updated the example with attaching two files.

### oras push

Push an artifact to a repository and show the manifest of the pushed artifact in pretty JSON format.

```shell
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toPrettyJson .}}'
```

```json
{
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
    "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
    "size": 12,
    "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "hello.txt"
    },
    "artifactType": "application/vnd.example+type",
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$digest"
}

> ```

Author: Updated the example with pushing two files.

> ```

Author: Updated the example with attaching two files.

### oras discover

Discover an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```shell
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1
```

```console
localhost:5000/hello/demo@sha256:04beb34cd24389147b4642a828b47fabefa722dea794dc3834567cf014ab0fe6
└── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
    ├── sha256:1b82e249d83eb4881b8bf4ff9cf13a28799907ddc624b4c3c9140fa77d54fa42
    ├── sha256:28653e2bb5b5a75393c3a8b58ed9998796299b41dc1ff1f55b9f0844ad7ba39c
```

> Discover an artifact's referrers manifest in JSON. Consider `oras discover` is more likely used by terminal (human) than machine, the default formatted output with `--format json` should be pretty JSON.

Author: Agree. Should we allow `--format json` to output raw JSON for "oras discover"?

    }
  ]
}
```

### oras manifest fetch

Fetch a specified layer and show the formatted JSON of the fetched manifest in formatted JSON.

```shell
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{(first .Layers).Reference}}'
```

```json
{
    "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$manifest_digest",
    "layers" : [
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
            },
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$first_layer_digest",
        },
        {
            "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
            "digest": "sha256:d2a84f4b8b650937ec8f73cd8be2c74add5a911ba64df27458ed8229da804a26",
            "size": 12,
            "annotations": {
                "org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-11-30T06:32:43Z"
            },
            "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$second_layer_digest",
        }
    ]
}

> ```

Author: I removed `oras manifest fetch` since there is not a clear scenario of support formatting JSON output for this command.

## Desired user experience for proposal 2

> In order to  the manifest fields in the output, format the output using the given [Go template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/). The keys of the returned JSON can be used as the values for the `--format` flag.

Author: Now I replaced the term "manifest" with "descriptor" to avoid ambiguous usage.

For example, push an artifact to a repository and filter out the value of `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```shell
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Reference}}', '{{.ArtifactType}}"
```

```console
"localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, "application/vnd.example+type"  
```

For example, pull a file and filter out the specified fields `mediaType`, `reference`, `size` of the pulled file in the standard output.

```shell
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.MediaType}}, {{.Reference}}, {{.Size}}"
```

```console
"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d", 12
```

For example, filter out the specified annotation value of an artifact by the key name `org.opencontainers.image.created`, with the [index function](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template#pkg-functions) defined in Go template.

```shell
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format '{{index .Manifest.Annotations "org.opencontainers.image.created"}}'
```

```console
"2023-11-29T06:32:43Z"
```

## FAQ

> - Why not consider extending the existing `--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output?

Reviewer 3: The ask here would be to updates the proposal for the reasoning that its because oras has commands. 
If there is enough love for --format due to similarities with other tools then that's good enough to state.  Basically when others read the proposal we don't want to set precedence that a breaking change prevents us from making the choice.

> - Why not consider extending the existing `--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output?

Author: Updated the reason in the FAQ section

`--output` has been used in other oras commands like `oras pull`, `oras manifest fetch` to output the file directory or file, it will be a breaking change if we extend the
`--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output. 

> - Why choose [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?

Reviewer 5: I understand the Go template approach but very often the problem people face with those templates is what is the data they can query for. The approach is good but I think we need to publish the schema for the outputs in our documentation.

Reviewer: User can use `--format json` to easily view the schema. We should document this usage.

Author: We will document common functions provided by Go template to help users query data from the JSON output.

# Formatted ORAS CLI output

## Table of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [Guidance](#guidance)
- [Scenarios](#scenarios)
  - [Scripting](#scripting)
  - [CI/CD](#cicd)
- [Proposal and desired user experience](#proposal-and-desired-user-experience)
  - [oras pull](#oras-pull)
  - [oras push](#oras-push)
  - [oras attach](#oras-attach)
  - [oras discover](#oras-discover)
- [FAQ](#faq)

## Background

> ORAS has prettified output designed for humans. However, for machine processing, especially in some automation scenarios like scripting and CI/CD pipelines, developers want to perform batch operations and chain different commands with ORAS, as well as filtering, modifying, and sorting objects based on the outputs that are emitted by the ORAS command. Developers expect the ORAS output can be generated as machine-readable text not only the prettified or tabular data, so that they can use the formatted outputs like JSON format to perform further advanced operations. 

Author: Thanks. Updated

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide programming-friendly experience for developers who want to automate their workflows on machines especially on Unix and most Unix-like operating systems, without parsing unstructured text. It will increase the developer experience for ORAS in automation and scripting scenarios. 

## Guidance

Provide two major options to enable users to define the output format of ORAS commands:

- Use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem
- Use `--format` to format the output of ORAS commands into different data formats or enable process output data using the given Go template.
  - Use `--format json|tree|table` to print the output in prettified JSON, tree view, or table view
  - Use `--format '{{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }}'` to enable extract or compose the output data using Go template functions

>   - If user doesn't specify `--format` flag, the default output should be raw JSON data 

Reviewer 6: This sentence is confusing as it only applies to certain commands.

Reviewer 3: To clarify, would be better to add `where applicable` since this is a guidance section.

Author: Moved this sentence to the `oras manifest fetch` same use case because this principle is only applicable to this command.

- Use `--output` to output a manifest file in the filesystem:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest.json
```

View the generated manifest file, it should be raw JSON data

```
$ cat sample-manifest.json
{"schemaVersion":2,"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","artifactType":"application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1","config":{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json","digest":"sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a","size":2,"data":"e30="},"layers":[{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65","size":14477,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"sbom.spdx"}},{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69","size":6639,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"scan-test-verify-image.json"}}],"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"}}
```

- Use `--format json` to print the output in prettified JSON:

```bash

> oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json

Reviewer 6: What will happen if you have `--output` and `--format` at the same time?
```
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest.json --format json
```

Reviewer 3: I like this question. 
We can define that if --format json is specified the output should go to the stdout as json. 
But the file will also be create. Does that sound reasonable?

Reviewer: IMHO, the desired UX should be similar to what we have now with `--descriptor`: `--format` and `--output -`(output manifest content to stdout) cannot be used at the same time

Author: There is no conflicts when using `--output` and `--format` at the same time. In this case, a manifest file should be produced in the filesystem and the prettified JSON should be outputted on the console:. I updated the example to include this case at line36.

```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
    "size": 2,
    "data": "e30="
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
      "size": 14477,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
      "size": 6639,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
}
```

- Use `--format '{{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }}'` to enable extract or compose the output data using Go template functions

```bash

> oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.Ref}}', '{{.Config.mediaType}}'

Reviewer 6: Do you mean
```suggestion
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.Ref}}, {{.Config.mediaType}}'
```

```

```json
localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b, application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json

> ```

Reviewer 6: This is not JSON.

Author: Removed this example.

To see more details about the reason of using this design principle in the formatted output, see [FAQ](#faq) section.

## Scenarios

### Scripting

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate some routine workflow in containers secure supply chain scenario, she wants the machine to get the image digest from the JSON output objects that are emitted by `oras push`, then use utility like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) or use environmental variables to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate some routine workflow in containers secure supply chain scenario, she wants the machine to get the image digest from the JSON output objects that are emitted by `oras push`, then use environmental variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.
```

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate some routine workflow in containers secure supply chain scenario, she wants the machine to get the image digest from the JSON output objects that are emitted by `oras push`, then use utility like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) or use environmental variables to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use a utility, like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) or environmental variables, to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as an argument outputted from `oras push`.
```

Wouldn't it be easier to just state "some downstream activity" instead of speculating different scenarios?

Author: Agree. Updated

> For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output, then attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command, finally sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the SBOM file's reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the last step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.
```

- Use xargs utility on Unix

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Ref}}' |\
xargs -I _ oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example _ sbom.spdx --format '{{.Ref}}' |\
xargs -I _ notation sign _ 
```

> - Use environmental variables on Unix

Reviewer 2: The use case presented here are variables and not environment variables

Author: Will change the term to `Shell variables`

```bash
REFERENCE_A=$(oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Ref}}')
REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.Ref}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B

> ```

Reviewer 6: Please make environmental variables more favorable than `xargs`.

Reviewer 6: The reason is simple that `xargs` is not a feature of a shell. Meanwhile, the right use of `xargs` is for advanced argument building. For instance, 
```console
$ printf "1\n2\n3\n4\n5" | xargs -L2 echo
1 2
3 4
5
```

Reviewer 6: It is not supposed to be used in casual scripting.

Reviewer 3: Yep we can remove the xargs example and just use the shell variable examples. That should be good enought.

Author: Agree. Removed the example with `xargs`.

> - Use [ConverFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

Reviewer 6: nit: remove `en-us` for language support.
```suggestion
- Use [ConverFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell
```

> - Use [ConverFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell
```

```powershell
$REFERENCE_A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$REFERENCE_B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A.Ref sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $REFERENCE_B.Ref
```

### CI/CD

> Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain multiple ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain several ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.
```

> For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output, then pass the pulled first layer to the second command `docker import` for further operation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output. Then, pass the pulled first layer to the second command (`docker import`) to perform further operations. 
```

Author: Updated

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |
          PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.first .Files.Path}}'`
          docker import $PATH
```

## Proposal and desired user experience

> Enable users to use the `--format <type>` flag to format output into structured data (e.g. JSON) and use the `--format` with [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) to manipulate the output fields. Users can still use `--format '{{toRawJson .}}'` to get raw JSON output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable users to use the `--format <type>` flag to format output into structured data (e.g. JSON) and use the `--format` with the [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) language to manipulate the output fields. Users can still use `--format '{{toRawJson .}}'` to get raw JSON output.
```

Author: Updated

> ### oras pull 

Reviewer 6: Could you include an example of pulling a folder?

Author: Added a Note at line184 to clarify this case

Pull a repository and display its metadata as formatted JSON in standard output. The following fields should be formatted in a JSON output:

- `Ref`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`
-  `Files`: a list of downloaded files
    -  `Path`: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)
    -  `Ref`: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)
    -  `MediaType`: media type of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  `Digest`: digest of the pulled file (layer) 
    -  `Size`: file size in bytes

> Pull a repository that contains multiple layers (files) and show their descriptor metadata as pretty JSON in standard output.

Reviewer 2: What signifies the output to be "pretty" in the following command?

Author: If user specifies the flag `--format json`, the output will be "pretty" in a structured JSON format

Author: I updated this section to avoid ambiguous description.

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/sbom sbom.spdx  --artifact-type example/vul-scan vul-scan.json --format json
```

```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186111",
  "Files": [
    {
      "Path": "/home/user/oras-install/sbom.spdx",
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "Path": "/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json",
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "vul-scan.json"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> Pull a repository that contains multiple layers (files) and display its descriptor metadata as raw JSON in standard output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pull a repository that contains multiple layers (files) and display its descriptor metadata as raw JSON as standard output.
```

Author: Updated

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toRawJson .}}'
```

```
{"Ref":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186111","Files":[{"Path":"/home/user/oras-install/sbom.spdx","Ref":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222","MediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","Digest":"sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222","Size":820},{"Path":"/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json","Ref":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b","MediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","Digest":"sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b","Size":820}]}
```

> ### oras push

Reviewer 6: Could you include an example of pushing a folder?

Author: Added a Note at line217 to clarify this case

> ### oras push

Reviewer 6: Could you include an example of pushing multiple files?

Author: There is an example with pushing multiple files at [line199](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR199)

> Push two files to a repository and show the descriptor of the image manifest in pretty JSON format.

Reviewer 2: Same question once again regarding where the output is prettified

Author: In general, if the user specifies the flag `--format json`, the output will be "pretty" in a structured JSON format

Reviewer 3: @FeynmanZhou ie there a reference to what prettified json that we can include or an expanded example with the outputs?

Author: @sajayantony The official [JSON spec](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwiOrLXC-sCDAxWuhq8BHajEAwkQFnoECAYQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.json.org%2F&usg=AOvVaw3WUMhwoap01T91PbRZTt_w&opi=89978449) doesn't have definition on what prettified JSON means. 
I added a paragraph in FAQ to elaborate on the difference of prettified JSON and raw JSON in the ORAS context, see [line #324](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR324).

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sbom.spdx vul-scan.json --format json 
```

> ```json

Reviewer: What if OCI image spec add a field named `ref` to descriptor in the future?

**I suggest we pick out all possible properties of a descriptor to a dedicated field like `Descriptor`**(name TBD).
```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "Descriptor": {
    "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
    "Digest": "sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
    "Size": 820,
    "Annotations": {
      "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
    }
  }
}
```
This is to make this design upward-compatible to any OCI image spec changes. If the above issue does happen, we can simply add `Ref` to `Descriptor`.

Reviewer: This can be also applied to `oras pull` and `oras attach`

Author: Good suggestion. Should we use `Config` as the field name here?

Reviewer: No, it's the descriptor of generated manifest. If we need to add another descriptor for `--config`, we should name it as Config.

Reviewer: Resolving go-template selectable fields are not expected to be compatible with image spec.

{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "Digest": "sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "Size": 820,
  "Annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
}
```

Push an artifact to a repository and filter out the value of `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format "{{.Ref}},{{.MediaType}}"
```

```console
localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json
```

> ### oras attach

Reviewer 6: Same example requests as `oras push`

Author: The existing example at line235 is using `oras attach` to attach multiple files.

```bash
oras attach $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/report-and-sbom vul-report.json:example/vul-scan sbom.spdx:example/sbom --format json
```

```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:0afd0f0c35f98dcb607de0051be7ebefd942eef1e3a6d26eefd1b2d80f2affbe",
  "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "Digest": "sha256:0afd0f0c35f98dcb607de0051be7ebefd942eef1e3a6d26eefd1b2d80f2affbe",
  "Size": 923,
  "Annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T08:59:21Z"
  }
}
```

### oras discover

View an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```bash
oras discover $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format tree
```

```console
localhost:localhost:5000/hello@sha256:5cb894d0c94c56894e160ad2eeb19a123b4d2155374e7709f43f8c0c2f249fe2
├── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
│   └── sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8
└── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
    └── sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. 

```bash
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format json
```

```json
{

>   "schemaVersion": 2,

Reviewer: Unlike other `--format json` output, the first letter of all properties here are not capitalized. We should point this inconsistency with ad-hoc fixes (like if the go template failed parsing, suggest to use Capitalized field selector)

Author: Added a note for the case of `oras manifest fetch` at [line #96](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR96)

  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.index.v1+json",
  "manifests": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8",
      "size": 964,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T13:48:32Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json"
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1",
      "size": 728,
      "annotations": {
        "io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256": "[\"792265ec6b22f0a87c7b3d980319d51a76a382de1b7a47bd877bb4e5a9beb637\"]",
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T14:41:56Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature"
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The `--format` flag will replace the existing `--output` flag. The `--output` will be marked as deprecated in ORAS v1.2.0. 

Reviewer: Should we also remove `--output` in the help output of `oras discover`?

Reviewer 2: I vote it should be marked as deprecated in v.1.2.0 and removed in a future version

Author: I think we can keep the `--output` flag in v1.2.0 but remove it in the next release. It will have less impact to users with this deprecation strategy.

## FAQ

- Why choose to use `--format` flag to enable JSON formatted output instead of extending the existing `--output` flag?

> ORAS follows the [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to output a file or directory and uses `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this kind of design principles in the similar formatted output feature. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ORAS follows [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to specify a file or directory content should be created within and `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools, like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this design principle within their formatted output feature. 
```

> - Why choose to use `--format` flag to enable JSON formatted output instead of extending the existing `--output` flag?
> 
> ORAS follows the [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to output a file or directory and uses `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this kind of design principles in the similar formatted output feature. 
> 
> In addition, it will be a breaking change if we extend the `--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output. 
> 
> - Why ORAS chooses [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?
> 
> Go template is a powerful method to customize output you want It allows users to manipulate the output format of certain commands. It provides access to data objects and additional functions that are passed into the template engine programmatically. It also has some useful libraries that have strong functions for Go’s template language to manipulate the output data, such as [Sprig](https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/).

Reviewer 6: Consider the following format
```suggestion
**Q:** Why choose to use `--format` flag to enable JSON formatted output instead of extending the existing `--output` flag?
**A:** ORAS follows the [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to output a file or directory and uses `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this kind of design principles in the similar formatted output feature.  In addition, it will be a breaking change if we extend the `--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output. 

**Q:** Why ORAS chooses [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?
**A:** Go template is a powerful method to customize output you want It allows users to manipulate the output format of certain commands. It provides access to data objects and additional functions that are passed into the template engine programmatically. It also has some useful libraries that have strong functions for Go’s template language to manipulate the output data, such as [Sprig](https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/).
```

Reviewer 6: It renders:

**Q:** Why choose to use `--format` flag to enable JSON formatted output instead of extending the existing `--output` flag?
**A:** ORAS follows the [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to output a file or directory and uses `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this kind of design principles in the similar formatted output feature.  In addition, it will be a breaking change if we extend the `--output` flag to enable JSON formatted output. 

**Q:** Why ORAS chooses [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?
**A:** Go template is a powerful method to customize output you want It allows users to manipulate the output format of certain commands. It provides access to data objects and additional functions that are passed into the template engine programmatically. It also has some useful libraries that have strong functions for Go’s template language to manipulate the output data, such as [Sprig](https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/).

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide a programming-friendly experience for developers who want to automate their workflows without needing to parse unstructured text.

## Guidance

Provide two major options to enable users to define the output format of ORAS commands:

- Use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem
- Use `--format` to format the output of ORAS commands into different data formats or enable process output data using the given Go template
  - Use `--format json|tree|table` to print the output in prettified JSON, tree view, or table view

>   - Use `--format '{{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }}'` to enable extract or compose the output data using Go template functions 

Reviewer 5: My assumption is that `--format` specifies the user-friendly format like `JSON`, `tree`, `table`, 'YAML' (in the future) and also filter the data that is presented in those "formats". Current proposal assumes that I can do that in Go template but this is a steep learning curve for users that are not familiar with Go. Also overloading the `--format` parameter with two different types of inputs for the switch is confusing.

Author: Correct. Go template is powerful and popular but it has a bit learning curve. However, the basic filter usage with Go template is not that complicated. I listed some example usages in the [following content](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR109). 

There are a lot of popular CLI tools in container world like [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubectl/kubectl-commands#get), [docker](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/image/ls/#options), [podman](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-images.1.html#format-format) has the same design, they also put the Go template option together with other format options in corresponding formatted output flag. I think users might be customed with this design.

> [!NOTE]
> - `--output -` and `--format` can not be used at the same time due to conflicts.

See example use cases of formatted output for `oras manifest fetch`:

- If user doesn't specify `--format` flag, the default output should be raw JSON data. This is the current behavior of `oras manifest fetch`.

- Use `--output <file>` and `--format` at the same time, a manifest file should be produced in the filesystem and the `mediaType` value should be outputted on the console:

```console

> $ oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest.json --format {{.config.MediaType}}

Reviewer: Suggest to remove `.json` suffix to avoid confusion, user might think `.json` some how asserts the output type of the file but it doesn't.
Also `.MediaType` should be lower-cased.
```suggestion
$ oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest --format {{.config.mediaType}}
```

application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
```

> View the contents of the generated manifest within specified `sample-manifest.json` file. The contents should be raw JSON data:

Reviewer: Remove suffix accordingly to previous comment.
```suggestion
View the contents of the generated manifest within specified `sample-manifest` file. The contents should be raw JSON data:
```

```console

> $ cat sample-manifest.json

Reviewer: Remove suffix accordingly to previous comment.
```suggestion
$ cat sample-manifest
```

```

- Use `--format json` to print the output in prettified JSON:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
    "size": 2,
    "data": "e30="
  },

>   "layers": [

Reviewer 5: As we discussed in the meeting, with the current proposal, unless I have advanced knowledge or Go templates, I will not be able to implement the following scenario:
1. Use single command to only see the layers in `json` format
2. Use single command to only see the layers in `tree` format

Ideally I would like to say as a user: "Give me this subset of data in this format". What I would expect is to have two separate switches - one for what format I would like to use (`json`, `tree`, `table`, `yaml`, `txt`) and one for what data I want to see (just the layers, just the mediaType, just the digest, etc.

Author: 1. Scenario 1 can be achieved via a single command.
2. `tree` format will be supported in `oras discover` only in this iteration and `--format {{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }} can be used to filter out the data that users only want to see in output.

```bash
REFERENCE_A=$(oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.Ref}}')
REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.Ref}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```powershell
$A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $A.Ref sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $B.Ref
```

### CI/CD

Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain several ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output. Then, pass the pulled first layer to the second command (`docker import`) to perform further operations. 

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |

>           PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.first .Files.Path}}'`

Reviewer: Below command should work
```suggestion
          PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{(first .Files).Path}}'`
```

### oras pull 

When using `oras pull` with the flag `--format`, the following fields should be formatted into JSON output:

- `Ref`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`
-  `Files`: a list of downloaded files
    - `Path`: the absolute file path of the pulled file (layer)
    - `Ref`: full reference by digest of the pulled file (layer)
    - `MediaType`: media type of the pulled file (layer) 
    - `Digest`: digest of the pulled file (layer) 
    - `Size`: file size in bytes
    - `Annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata for the image manifest

For example, pull an artifact that contains multiple layers (files) and show their descriptor metadata as pretty JSON in standard output:

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/sbom sbom.spdx  --artifact-type example/vul-scan vul-scan.json --format json
```

```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186111",

>   "Files": [

Reviewer 3: Would recommend all these properties to be lowercase aligns with things like 'mediaType' and other properties in the manifest that are all lower case. @FeynmanZhou

Author: @sajayantony Due to the lower casing field selectors are not supported natively via Go template, when use the flag `--format` to print the prettified JSON format, the first letter of selectors and all output fields are supposed to be upper case except for `oras manifest fetch`. 

`oras manifest fetch` formatted output is lower case since its field names are lower case in the OCI Spec and the original output is JSON format.

Reviewer 3: Given our discussion of kubectl, I'm more inclined towards a lower case only and avoid the extra cognitive steps. 
For e.g. why should a user have to thinks about `Size` in the CLI output and `size` in the manifest

Author: Agree with using lowercase for the first letter of each property as we chose to follow [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/quick-reference/#viewing-and-finding-resources)'s design principle. Now all properties in the samples have been updated to lowercase.

      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "Path": "/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json",
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "Size": 820,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "vul-scan.json"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> When pulling a folder to filesystem, the value of `Path` should be an absolute path of the folder and should be ended with slash `/` or backslash `\`, for example, `/home/Bob/sample-folder/` on Unix or `C:\Users\Bob\sample-folder\` on Windows. Other fields are the same as the example of pulling files as above.

For example, pull an artifact that contains multiple layers (files) and show their descriptor metadata as raw JSON in the standard output.

```bash

> oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toRawJson .}}'

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this function is even necessary would maybe have an issue in the community before pushing for this. Also raw json is useful mostly only for content addressable items and not outputs. Any concerns in pulling this out of this spec?

Author: This function '{{toRawJson .}}' is a native Go template function. I use it as an example on how to generate a RAW JSON metadata format with this Go template function.

Author: FYI: https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/

```

### oras push

Push two files to a repository and show the descriptor of the image manifest in pretty JSON format. 

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sbom.spdx vul-scan.json --format json 
```

```json
{
  "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "Digest": "sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "Size": 820,
  "Annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Should we add `tag` values as well since we are pushing by tag?

Author: `tag` is an input value which is already known to user and doesn't change after oras commands executed. I think it is not necessary show a known value provided by user.

Reviewer 3: Given the output has the tag in the regular output, I would suggest maybe a someting like 
`"refAsTag": "localhost:5000/oras:v1"`

- Enables clients to maybe log the json and understand that the tag was pushed with this digest and also only depend on json output in followin gcommands.

Reviewer: > Enables clients to maybe log the json and understand that the tag was pushed with this digest and also only depend on json output in followin gcommands.

I would suggest add a `tags` field since multi-tagged pushing is supported

Author: Added `tags` to the properties as users may want to log the input value from the formatted output for auditing purposes.

Reviewer 3: On further discussion would recommend a fully qualified array with a property maybe like `referenceByTags` 
I would however consider renaming it to `referenceByDigest`, even though obvious the fully qualified digest reference is singular an almost equivalent to an identifier, so would leave it as `ref` or `reference`. As that is the string that clients can use with confidence.

  "Size": 923,
  "Annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T08:59:21Z"
  }
}
```

### oras discover

View an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```bash
oras discover $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format tree
```

```console
localhost:localhost:5000/hello@sha256:5cb894d0c94c56894e160ad2eeb19a123b4d2155374e7709f43f8c0c2f249fe2
├── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
│   └── sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8
└── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
    └── sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. The following fields should be outputted:

- `Manifests`: the list of referrers
  - `Ref`: full reference by digest of the referrer
  - `MediaType`: media type of the referrer
  - `Size`: referrer file size in bytes
  - `Digest`: digest of the referrer
  - `ArtifactType`: artifact type of a referrer
  - `Annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata in a referrer

See an example:

```bash
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format json
```

> 

Reviewer 3: same feedback as before. I would recommend moving all these to lower case properties.

Author: Replied above

# Formatted ORAS CLI output 

ORAS has prettified output designed for humans. However, for machine processing, especially in some automation scenarios like scripting and CI/CD pipelines, developers want to perform batch operations and chain different commands with ORAS, as well as filtering, modifying, and sorting objects based on the outputs that are emitted by the ORAS command. Developers expect the ORAS output can be generated as machine-readable text not only the prettified or tabular data, so that they can use the formatted outputs like JSON format to perform further advanced operations. 

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide programming-friendly experience for developers who want to automate their workflows on machines especially on Unix and most Unix-like operating systems, without parsing unstructured text. It will increase the developer experience for ORAS in automation and scripting scenarios. 

> 

Reviewer 3: Let's add a guidance section to call out the main parameters that would apply to commands. 
Basically most commands could  accept a `--format text|json|yaml|tree|table` but given that we only have json and tree let's only call those out.  

In the guidance section let's use a canonical command say 
`oras manifest fetch --output manifest.json --format json  ghcr.io/oras-project/oras:v1.1.0` as an example

Author: Added a Guidance section and used `oras manifest fetch` as an example.

"Files": [
    {
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "Digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
      "Size": 14477,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "Ref": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "Digest": "sha256:e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855",
      "Size": 0,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "hello.txt"
      }
    }
  ]
```

### oras manifest fetch

Fetch a manifest and filter out its reference and media type in standard output:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{.Ref}}', '{{.Config.mediaType}}'
```

```json
localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b, application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
```

### oras discover

> Discover an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

Reviewer 3: Let's call out that the default is `--format tree`

Author: Updated

```

See the prettified JSON output of an image manifest when use `--format json`:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
    "size": 2,
    "data": "e30="
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
      "size": 14477,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
      "size": 6639,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-13T15:08:49Z"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think can follow up with with a similar output for oras copy. I would like find out all the referrers that did get copied and their digest and artifactTypes that got copied over. 

The console output cannot be used to track everything that got copied.

Author: @sajayantony 
I am still a bit confusing about using `--format` in `oras copy`. `oras copy` will not change the metadata of the copied image manifest and its referrers. 

Should we use [oras discover](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR275) with `--format` to filter out the `digest` and `artifactTypes` of referrers on a source artifact instead?

Reviewer 3: I was suggesting we create another issue since the usecase is not clear and we can follow up as an other PR if necessary.

Author: @sajayantony Sounds good. I will create an issue to track it, in case any users have specific scenarios or feature requests on it in the future.

Author: @sajayantony Created an issue to track potential formatted JSON output support for oras copy: https://github.com/oras-project/oras/issues/1226

Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.

- Use shell variables on Unix

```bash

> REFERENCE_A=$(oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.reference}}')

Reviewer 5: Looking at tools like Trivy and Grype, it seems that they separate the `--format` from the template. Both those tools have `--format` switch that takes values like `json`, `spdx`, etc and one of those values is `template`. If `template` is selected as a value, then additional switch `--template` is required to specify the Go template.

Reviewer 5: Also, looking at skopeo, the `-f` switch is only for Go template (which can result in JSON) but it will be very complex template to create table, CSV etc.

Reviewer 3: Actually having a `-o template --template ...` does align even with kubectl 

# Return only the phase value of the specified pod
  kubectl get -o template pod/web-pod-13je7 --template={{.status.phase}}

Author: @toddysm 
It would be much reasonable to align the design principles of formatted output with container management CLI tools like `kubectl`, `docker`. Trivy and Grape are vulnerability scanning tools that may have different design.

`kubectl` also puts the "Go template" along with different output formats under its `--output` flag. ORAS borrowed its idea and simplied the usage. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/quick-reference/#formatting-output

`oras` has almost the same behavior of formatted output control as `docker`. See https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/image/ls/#format.

If we separate the data format and Go template into two different flags, i.e. `--format <data_format>` and `--template <go_template>`, it would be much more complicated because ORAS requires to specify two flags in some cases.

Reviewer 5: @FeynmanZhou as per @sajayantony comment above, the two flags are also used in `kubectl` Having two flags is not a complication but better usability IMHO. Overloading flags adds to confusion, and it is considered not a good experience practice.

Reviewer 3: I think the main point here is that don't overload the `--format` and have a separate argument for `--template`. Basically avoid over load bearing arguments.

Reviewer 5: OK, I went ahead and did the analysis on the common tools mentioned above: `skopeo`, `kubectl`, `docker`, `trivy`, and `grype` and here is the summary.

# `skopeo`
First of all, `skopeo` has no `--output` switch at all. Which means that you cannot control how the output is formated (JSON, YAML, table, tree, TXT, CSV, etc.) and the supported formats are either JSON or TXT based on the comand. Users are left to the decision of the `skopeo` implementers how to format the output. Commands that have meaningful output and can be used for more structured parsing are `inspect`, `list-tags`, and `manifest-digest`. The first two return JSON from, while the latter returns the digest as single value.

Looking at the `-f, --format` switch, it is available for the following commands:
- `copy`
   In this case it specifies what should be the target manifest format and has nothing to do with the format of the output. It expects values like `oci`, `v2s1, and `v2s2` (nothing to do with output format as we define it).
- `inspect`
  This one uses ONLY Go template format, and IMHO is more intended to filter data than to format the output as it seems from the example.
- `sync`
   In this case it specifies what should be the target manifest format and has nothing to do with the format of the output. It expects values like `oci`, `v2s1, and `v2s2` (nothing to do with output format as we define it). Same as `copy`.

As an overall opinion, I find the `skopeo` switches confusing and not very intuitive as the example with `-f` shows above, and I don't think their design should be used as an user-friendly example.

# `kubectl`
`kubectl` uses `-o, --output` that is intended to spefify how the output should be formatted. This switch expects various options like `json`, `yaml`, etc including `template`, and `go-template` (not sure what is the difference between those two BTW). It also uses the `--template` switch if the `-o` switch is set to `template` or (I believe) `go-template` (or their respective file path options).

Using the above two switches, one has very flexible and user-friendly approach to control the output. The `-f` switch is with a very clear purpose - either standard, well-known formats like `json`, or custom controlled that require the `--template` switch.

Note that `kubectl` is not intended to safe (local) files as a result of the commands. You can still pipe the output (as specified and formatted with the two switches above) and save the output to a file (or use in another command). It does have `-f` switch that is intended as an input for identifying the resource. It also has `--field-selector`, which is used to filter the resources on which the command will operate (not exactly the filtering we want to have in ORAS but I have a point below).

While I cannot say that all the `-o` options are clear to me (not sure what `name` is, for example), there is clear separation between switches and their purpose and they do not overload the `-o` with enumerated formats and free form templates.

# `docker`
`docker` is the one that overloads the `--format` and has the options either using `json` or Go template. It does not have the flexibility to load templates from files or any other options like `yaml`, `table`, `tree` or what have you. In general - much less flexible than `kubectl`.

# `trivy`
`trivy` is aligned with what `kubectl` has. They use `-f, --format` for the enumeration of possible formats as well as `--template` in the case of a Go template selected in `-f`. They also use `-o, --output` to save the result to a file (something that `kubectl` doesn't have). Note, though, that Trivy's `-o` is to save the output of the command and not save the downloaded content from the server as it may be the case with ORAS. 

# `grype`
`grype` doesn't have `--format` because they use the short-hand switch `-f` for other purposes. Instead, they use the `-o, --output` for that purpose but as with `trivy` and `kubectl` they require `--template` switch if `template` is specified in `-o` (only path to a Go template file is accepted). Unlike `trivy` they don't have a switch to save the output.

# Summary
IMHO, the most user-friendly and intuitive approaches are by `kubectl` and `trivy`. In both of those the output format choices and the Go template are specified using different switches. I find `trivy`'s enumerated list more clear than `kubectl` one but this is beyond the point.

Nevertheless, having clear purpose of the switches makes the CLI much clearer and flexible than overloading switches (as we see with `skopeo`)

IMHO, I think that we need to have the following switches and use those consistently across all the commands in ORAS:
- `-f, --format` for the enumeration of possible command output formats (`json`, `yaml`, `tree`, `template`, etc.)
- We currently use `-o, --output` for the destination of the downloaded content from the server. This can be the same as the command output (in case of getting the manifest) or different (in the case of saving the blob). Maybe a better switch would be `-d, --destination`to avoid confusion with the command output.
- `--template` for specifying the Go template only if `-f` is set to `template` (or eventually `template-file`, that is not available right now)

Reviewer: I am okay with separating the flags in ORAS, but I need to point out that `kubectl` does overload -o/--output with output format (json/yaml/table/name) and go template.

Reviewer 5: @qweeah I see what you mean but I find this confusing. Isn't this the same as `-o template` and the `--template {{.spec}}`?

Reviewer: @toddysm indeed. `kubectl` makes `--template xxx` equivalent to `-o template=xxx`, which we need to avoid since we do not want to overloaded flags.

Author: Thanks @toddysm for the detailed summary. 

After tested `kubectl` and `trivy`, I found these two problems that we may need to notice:

 1. `kubectl` provides three UX to allow use Go template and **the second UX overloads the go template argument with other enumerated output formats**. The second one is almost the same as the current design of oras `--format <go_template>`:

```
kubectl get svc/kubernetes -o template --template='{{.metadata}}'
```
is equivalent to
```
kubectl get svc/kubernetes -o template='{{.metadata}}'
```
is equivalent to
```
kubectl get svc/kubernetes  --template='{{.metadata}}'
```

2. Neither `kubectl` nor `trivy` supports specifying a data format like `json/yaml/table` and manipulate the data with `--template <go_template_function>` at the same time. The printed output of using latter flag `--template` will be overwritten by former one. 

For example, [trivy](https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy/v0.50/docs/configuration/reporting/#custom-template) allows to manipulate data with `--template <go_template_function>` only when specifying `--format template`:

```
trivy image --format template --template <go_template_function> golang:1.19-alpine
```

### Summary

If we want to avoid overloading and learn good aspects from `kubectl` and `trivy`, it should be reasonable to split it into two flags `--format` and `--template`. The UX will be like the following example:

```
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format <go-template/json> --template <go_template/file_path>
```

Reviewer 3: Template file could be another arg but maybe later.

Reviewer 5: Related to https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199#discussion_r1578838180, @qweeah and @FeynmanZhou  the difference between `kubectl` and our proposal is that `kubectl` requires the word `template` (and `=`) before the template is specified in the `-o` flag. This is much clearer than just pasting the template in the `-o` flag. While I can see how this may be convenient for short templates, I still think it is inconsistent from experience point of view. 
Regarding 2. from @FeynmanZhou above - I agree that this is the case. The filtering is a separate problem that I think we should tackle in a new issue.

Author: Had a discussion with @toddysm . The decision is to have two separate flags `--format <data_format>` and `--go-template <go_template_function>` because it will not overload two operations in the same flag. 
I will update the Spec to reflect the changes as we discussed above.

Reviewer 3: Please align the flag values with kubectl. 
I think it’s —format go-template.

Reviewer 6: `--format go-template` makes more sense to me and is a better generic design in general.

Author: I have separated the `--format` flag into two different flags `--format` and `--template` at [line 28 and 29](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#diff-ddd85908fb8fee8c57a3726cb042b0572e9b4b333000356816268399ced78cccR28) and updated all samples in this Spec: 

> - Use `--format json|tree|table|go-template='{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. Make `-f` as an alias of `--format`.
> - Use `--template '{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. To avoid ambiguous, this flag can only be used along with `--format <DATA_FORMAT>`.

For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.

- Use shell variables on Unix

```bash
REFERENCE_A=$(oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format '{{.reference}}')
REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.reference}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```powershell

> $A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json

Reviewer 7: Based on chat, it would be helpful if you pass multiple tags (E.g. with `oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG,$TAG1 hello.txt --format json --no-tty`) if the result could have multiple items in the array so you can also get the reference digest for each artifact tag

Author: Yeah, that's right direction. There is an ongoing discussion below https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199/files#r1565144883. We will need to update the Spec accordingly.

Push a folder to a repository and filter out the value of `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sample-folder --format '{{.reference}}, {{.mediaType}}'
```

```console
localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json
```

### oras attach

When using `oras pull` with the flag `--format`, the following fields should be formatted into JSON output:

- `tags`: attached tags as reference, it can be one or multiple tags
- `reference`: full reference by digest of the referrer file
- `mediaType`: media type of the referrer
- `size`: referrer file size in bytes
- `digest`: digest of the attached referrer file
- `artifactType`: artifact type of the referrer
- `annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata in a referrer

For example, attach two files to an image and show the descriptor metadata of the referrer in JSON format.

```bash
oras attach $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/report-and-sbom vul-report.json:example/vul-scan sbom.spdx:example/sbom --format json
```

```json
{

>   "tags": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG",

Reviewer 3: Is this comma separated or an array?

Author: It a separated comma at the end of each line in formatted JSON output. For this line, it can be one or multiple tags either.

Reviewer: IMHO making this attribute an array will make auotmation easier.

Author: @qweeah That's a good point. I think make `tags` be an array would be much convenient and flexible for users. They can choose to filter one tag or all tags from array.

```

- Use `--format json` to print the output in prettified JSON:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
    "size": 2,
    "data": "e30="
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
      "size": 14477,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
      "size": 6639,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: This manifest json is wrong, the displayed data is only a partial data of `{{.contents}}`.

Author: Updated and added `content`

- [Proposal and desired user experience](#proposal-and-desired-user-experience)
  - [oras pull](#oras-pull)
  - [oras push](#oras-push)
  - [oras attach](#oras-attach)
  - [oras discover](#oras-discover)
- [FAQ](#faq)

## Background

ORAS has prettified output designed for humans. However, for machine processing, especially in automation scenarios, like scripting and CI/CD pipelines, developers want to perform batch operations and chain different commands with ORAS, as well as filtering, modifying, and sorting objects based on the outputs that are emitted by the ORAS command. Developers expect that ORAS output can be emitted as machine-readable text instead of only the prettified or tabular data, so that it can be used to perform other operations.

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide a programming-friendly experience for developers who want to automate their workflows without needing to parse unstructured text.

## Guidance

Provide two major options to enable users to define the output format of ORAS commands:

- Use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem

> - Use `--format` to format the output of ORAS commands into different data formats or enable process output data using the given Go template

Reviewer 6: It is important to call it is _metadata output_.
```suggestion
- Use `--format` to format the metadata output of ORAS commands into different data formats or enable process output data using the given Go template
```

  - Use `--format json|tree|table` to print the output in prettified JSON, tree view, or table view
  - Use `--format '{{ GO_TEMPLATE_FUNCTION }}'` to enable extract or compose the output data using Go template functions 

> For example, when using `oras manifest fetch` with the flag `--format`, the following fields should be formatted into JSON output:

Reviewer 6: Should the `oras manifest fetch` part be moved to the section `Proposal and desired user experience`?

Author: I will move it to the section `Proposal and desired user experience` below.

- `reference`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`
- `mediaType`: media type of the image manifest
- `digest`: digest of the image manifest
- `size`: manifest file size in bytes
- `artifactType`: the type of an artifact when the manifest is used for an artifact
- `content`: content output includes descriptor metadata and layers in filesystem
    - `config`: a content descriptor describes the disposition of the targeted content

>     - `layers`:  array of objects, each object in the array MUST be a descriptor

Reviewer 6: This is incorrect. `content` is the prettified manifest.

See example use cases of formatted output for `oras manifest fetch`:

- Use `--output <file>` and `--format` at the same time, a manifest file should be produced in the filesystem and the `mediaType` value should be outputted on the console:

```console

> $ oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest --format {{.config.mediaType}}

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
$ oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --output sample-manifest --format {{.content.config.mediaType}}
```

application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
```

View the contents of the generated manifest within specified `sample-manifest` file. The contents should be raw JSON data:

```console
$ cat sample-manifest
{"schemaVersion":2,"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","artifactType":"application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1","config":{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json","digest":"sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a","size":2,"data":"e30="},"layers":[{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65","size":14477,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"sbom.spdx"}},{"mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar","digest":"sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69","size":6639,"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.title":"scan-test-verify-image.json"}}],"annotations":{"org.opencontainers.image.created":"2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"}}
```

> - Use `--format json` to print the output in prettified JSON:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Use `--format json` to print the metadata output in prettified JSON:
```

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "content": {
    "config": {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
      "size": 2,
      "data": "e30="
    },
    "layers": [
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
        "size": 14477,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
        }
      },
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
        "size": 6639,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
        }
      }
    ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }

> }

Author: Fixed

```

> [!NOTE]
> - `--output -` and `--format` can not be used at the same time due to conflicts.

## Scenarios

### Scripting

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

Reviewer 6: nit:
```suggestion
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as an argument outputted from `oras push`.
```

REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format '{{.reference}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```powershell
$A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $A.reference sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $B.reference
```

### CI/CD

Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain several ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output. Then, pass the pulled first layer to the second command (`docker import`) to perform further operations. 

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |
          PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{(first .Files).Path}}'`

>           docker import $PATH

Reviewer 6: This example is weird. Can you use other commands like `cat` instead of `docker import`?

Author: Updated

```

## Proposal and desired user experience

> Enable users to use the `--format <type>` flag to format output into structured data (e.g. JSON) and use the `--format` with the [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) language to manipulate the output fields. Users can still use `--format '{{toRawJson .}}'` to get raw JSON output.

Reviewer 6: Since all output are metadata output, there is no such a concept of _raw JSON output_.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Enable users to use the `--format <type>` flag to format metadata output into structured data (e.g. JSON) and use the `--format` with the [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) language to manipulate the output fields.
```

      "reference": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222",
      "size": 820,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
      }
    },
    {
      "path": "/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json",
      "reference": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b",
      "size": 820,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "vul-scan.json"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> When pulling a folder to filesystem, the value of `path` should be an absolute path of the folder and should be ended with slash `/` or backslash `\`, for example, `/home/Bob/sample-folder/` on Unix or `C:\Users\Bob\sample-folder\` on Windows. Other fields are the same as the example of pulling files as above.

> For example, pull an artifact that contains multiple layers (files) and show their descriptor metadata as raw JSON in the standard output.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For example, pull an artifact that contains multiple layers (files) and show their descriptor metadata as compact JSON in the standard output.
```

```bash
oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format '{{toRawJson .}}'
```

```
{"reference":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186111","files":[{"path":"/home/user/oras-install/sbom.spdx","reference":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222","mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","digest":"sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd186222","size":820},{"path":"/home/user/oras-install/vul-scan.json","reference":"localhost:5000/oras@sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b","mediaType":"application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json","digest":"sha256:7414904f07f515f48fe4afeaf876e3151039a81e7177b9c66e9e7ed6dd18669b","size":820}]}
```

### oras push

When using `oras pull` with the flag `--format`, the following fields should be formatted into JSON output:

- `reference`: full artifact reference by digest, e.g, `$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`

> - `referenceByTags`: array, pushed tags by reference, e.g. `$REGISTRY/$REPO@TAG1`

Reviewer: Why this field is needed in the output of `oras pull`?

Even if it need to be added, `oras pull` only involve one or zero(when pull via digest) tag. So it should be a string field named like `referenceByTag`.

Author: It should `oras push`. I had a mistake in this sentence and just fixed it.

- `referenceByTags`: array, pushed tags by reference, e.g. `$REGISTRY/$REPO@TAG1`
- `mediaType`: media type of the pushed file (layer) 
- `digest`: digest of the pushed file (layer) 
- `size`: file size in bytes
- `annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata for the image manifest

For example, push a file and two tags to a repository and show the descriptor of the image manifest in pretty JSON format. 

```bash

> oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG1, $TAG2 sbom.spdx vul-scan.json --format json 

Reviewer 6: no spaces between tags
```suggestion
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG1,$TAG2 sbom.spdx vul-scan.json --format json 
```

```

```json
{

>   "reference": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",

Reviewer 6: for consistency
```suggestion
  "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
```

  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "digest": "sha256:4a5b8c83d153f52afdfcb422db56c2349aae3bd5ecf8338a58353b5eb6681c45",
  "size": 820,
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  },

>   "artifactType": "json/example",

Reviewer 6: `artifactType` is not documented

Author: Added `artifactType`

> When pushing a folder to filesystem, the output fields are the same as the example of pushing files as above.

Push a folder to a repository and filter out the value of `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```bash
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sample-folder --format '{{.reference}}, {{.mediaType}}'
```

```console
localhost:5000@sha256:85438e6598bf35057962fff34399a362d469ca30a317939427fca6b7a289e70d, application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json
```

### oras attach

When using `oras pull` with the flag `--format`, the following fields should be formatted into JSON output:

- `reference`: full reference by digest of the referrer file
- `mediaType`: media type of the referrer
- `size`: referrer file size in bytes
- `digest`: digest of the attached referrer file
- `artifactType`: artifact type of the referrer
- `annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata in a referrer

For example, attach two files to an image and show the descriptor metadata of the referrer in JSON format.

```bash
oras attach $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --artifact-type example/report-and-sbom vul-report.json:example/vul-scan sbom.spdx:example/sbom --format json
```

```json
{

>   "tags": "$REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG",

Reviewer 3: This example should be an array.

Author: Good catch. The `referenceByTags` only exists in `oras push`. I removed this property from `oras attach`.

  "reference": "localhost:5000/oras@sha256:0afd0f0c35f98dcb607de0051be7ebefd942eef1e3a6d26eefd1b2d80f2affbe",
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "digest": "sha256:0afd0f0c35f98dcb607de0051be7ebefd942eef1e3a6d26eefd1b2d80f2affbe",
  "size": 923,
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T08:59:21Z"
  }

>   "artifactType": "doc/example"

Reviewer 6: inconsistent type against the original command
```suggestion
  "artifactType": "example/report-and-sbom"
```

}
```

### oras discover

View an artifact's referrers. The default output should be listed in a tree view.

```bash

> oras discover $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format tree

Reviewer 6: What about `--verbose` for tree output?

Author: Currently, the output shows `annotations` of each referrer in the tree view as below. In theory, tree view is intended to display the artifact reference relationship graph, i.e. **demonstrate how referrers associate with the root artifact**. It looks a bit confusing and complicated that the annotations data also showed in the tree view. If users want to see `annotations` of each referrer, they could use JSON view. 

Current behavior:

```
oras discover localhost:5000/my-ubuntu:latest -v
localhost:5000/my-ubuntu@sha256:a3785f78ab8547ae2710c89e627783cfa7ee7824d3468cae6835c9f4eae23ff7
├── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
│   └── sha256:8dee8cb9a1334595545e3baf15c3eeed13c4b35ae08e3ab32e1df31fb152dc1d
│       ├── io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256: '["79e91aa1e109a16df87d200e493fd3d33c67253f76d41334d7f7c29c00ba55b3"]'
│       └── org.opencontainers.image.created: "2024-04-02T10:32:55Z"
└── sbom/example
    └── sha256:50fd0dc107d84b5e7b402688000a7ed3aaf8a2692d5cb74da5277fa3c4cecf15
        └── org.opencontainers.image.created: "2024-05-10T07:57:10Z"
```

So it would be much neat if we keep the verbose output consistent with the default output in the tree view of `oras discover`:

```
localhost:5000/my-ubuntu@sha256:a3785f78ab8547ae2710c89e627783cfa7ee7824d3468cae6835c9f4eae23ff7
├── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
│   └── sha256:8dee8cb9a1334595545e3baf15c3eeed13c4b35ae08e3ab32e1df31fb152dc1d
└── sbom/example
    └── sha256:50fd0dc107d84b5e7b402688000a7ed3aaf8a2692d5cb74da5277fa3c4cecf15
```

Reviewer 6: I suggest that we design the tree view holistically in the next iteration.

Author: SGTM. Linking this comment to the verbose log enhancement issue https://github.com/oras-project/oras/issues/1091#issuecomment-2105503928

```

```console
localhost:localhost:5000/hello@sha256:5cb894d0c94c56894e160ad2eeb19a123b4d2155374e7709f43f8c0c2f249fe2
├── application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json
│   └── sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8
└── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
    └── sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. The following fields should be outputted:

- `manifests`: the list of referrers

>   - `reference`: full reference by digest of the referrer

Reviewer 6: This field is not shown in the example

Author: Added `reference` to example below

## FAQ

**Q:** Why choose to use `--format` flag to enable JSON formatted output instead of extending the existing `--output` flag?
**A:** ORAS follows [GNU](https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/Option-Table.html#Option-Table) design principles. ORAS uses `--output` to specify a file or directory content should be created within and `--format` to format the output into JSON or using the given Go template. Popular tools, like Docker, Podman, and Skopeo also follow this design principle within their formatted output feature.

**Q:** Why ORAS chooses [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?
**A:** Go template is a powerful method to allow users to manipulate and customize output you want. It provides access to data objects and additional functions that are passed into the template engine programmatically. It also has some useful libraries that have strong functions for Go’s template language to manipulate the output data, such as [Sprig](https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/). The basic usage of Go template functions are easy to use.

**Q:** What is the difference of prettified JSON and raw JSON?

> **A:** In the context of ORAS output, raw JSON means that `oras` outputs the JSON object as it is returned by the server, while prettified JSON means oras outputs the modified JSON objects with whitespace adjusted, such as formatted with human-friendly indentations and newlines.

Reviewer 6: This QA seems to be unnecessary now.

Author: Make sense. Removed this QA as there is no "toRawJson" function in the examples

  - [oras attach](#oras-attach)
  - [oras discover](#oras-discover)
- [FAQ](#faq)

## Background

ORAS has prettified output designed for humans. However, for machine processing, especially in automation scenarios, like scripting and CI/CD pipelines, developers want to perform batch operations and chain different commands with ORAS, as well as filtering, modifying, and sorting objects based on the outputs that are emitted by the ORAS command. Developers expect that ORAS output can be emitted as machine-readable text instead of only the prettified or tabular data, so that it can be used to perform other operations.

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide multiple views and a programming-friendly experience for developers, DevOps engineers, IT professionals who want to automate their workflows without needing to parse unstructured text.

## Guidance

ORAS allows to use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem. To enable users to format the metadata output of ORAS commands and compute figures based on the formatted output, these two options are proposed as follows:

> - Use `--format <DATA_FORMAT>` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template, i.e. `--format json|tree|table|go-template=GO_TEMPLATE`. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. This is the primary and recommended usage.

Reviewer: Suggest to skip <DATA_FORMAT> since it's explained later.
```suggestion
- Use `--format` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template, i.e. `--format json|tree|table|go-template=GO_TEMPLATE`. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. This is the primary and recommended usage.
```

> - Use `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. To avoid ambiguous, this flag can only be used along with `--format <DATA_FORMAT>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. To avoid ambiguous, this flag can only be used along with `--format go-template`.
```

## Feature status

> Both `--format` and `--template` are marked as "Experimental" in its first iteration since it is still in development and is available in a part of ORAS CLI commands. In future versions, `--format` could be upgraded to Preview but `--template` might be remaining "Experimental" or even being removed in case other types of template emerged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both `--format` and `--template` are marked as "Experimental" in its first iteration since it is still in development and is available in a part of ORAS CLI commands. In future versions, `--format` could be upgraded to Preview but `--template` might remain `Experimental` or even being removed in case other types of templates emerged.
```

## Scenarios

### Scripting
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as an argument outputted from `oras push`.

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

Reviewer: Is this line duplicated?

> For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.

Reviewer: Should this line be merged with the last sentence of previous line `For example, she can use oras attach to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as an argument outputted from oras push.`?

REFERENCE_B=$(oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $REFERENCE_A sbom.spdx --format go-template='{{.reference}}') 
notation sign $REFERENCE_B
```

- Use [ConvertFrom-Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/convertfrom-json) on Windows PowerShell

```powershell
$A=oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG hello.txt --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
$B=oras attach --artifact-type sbom/example $A.reference sbom.spdx --format json --no-tty | ConvertFrom-Json
notation sign $B.reference
```

### CI/CD

Bob is a DevOps engineer. He uses the ORAS GitHub Actions [Setup action](https://github.com/oras-project/setup-oras) to install ORAS in his CI/CD workflow. He wants to chain several ORAS commands in a Shell script to perform multiple operations.

For example, pull multiple files (layers) from a repository and filter out the file path of its first layer in the standard output. Then, pass the pulled first layer to the second command (e.g. `cat`) to perform further operations. 

```yaml
jobs:
  example-job:
    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |

>           PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format go-template='{{(first .Files).Path}}'`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format go-template='{{(first .files).path}}'`
```

  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "digest": "sha256:8be4c36a29979c72fdd225654498791fb381a7dd8332ade1981274a16220fe1c",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "content": {
    "config": {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
      "size": 2,
    },
    "layers": [
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
        "size": 14477,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
        }
      },
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
        "size": 6639,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
        }
      }
    ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
},
}

> ```

Author: Good catch. I have fixed it and checked this piece on https://jsonchecker.com/
![image](https://github.com/oras-project/oras/assets/40452856/31e0b62f-d9bd-41e5-8516-786f9b129396)

> ```

Reviewer 6: Try using vscode or other text editors instead of an online tool since text editors give you more control over just visualization.

│   └── sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8
└── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
    └── sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. The following fields should be outputted:

- `manifests`: the list of referrers
  - `reference`: full reference by digest of the referrer
  - `mediaType`: media type of the referrer
  - `size`: referrer file size in bytes
  - `digest`: digest of the referrer
  - `artifactType`: artifact type of a referrer
  - `annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata in a referrer

See an example:

```bash
oras discover $REGISTRY/$REPO:v1 --format json
```

```json
{
  "manifests": [
    {
      "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8"
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8",
      "size": 964,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T13:48:32Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json"
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 6: This example does not match the tree view example.

- Use `--format <DATA_FORMAT>` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template, i.e. `--format json|tree|table|go-template=GO_TEMPLATE`. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. This is the primary and recommended usage.
- Use `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. To avoid ambiguity, this flag can only be used along with `--format go-template`.

## Feature status

Both `--format` and `--template` are marked as "Experimental" in its first iteration since it is still in development and is available in a part of ORAS CLI commands. In future versions, `--format` could be upgraded to "Preview" but `--template` might remain "Experimental" or even being removed in case other types of templates emerged.

## Scenarios

### Scripting

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`. For example, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.

Reviewer: Duplicated `For example`
```suggestion
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`. The detailed steps would be: 1) Firstly, push an artifact to a registry and generate the artifact reference in the standard output. Then, attach an SBOM to the artifact using the artifact reference (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) outputted from the first command. Finally, sign the attached SBOM with another tool against the reference of the SBOM file (`$REGISTRY/$REPO@$DIGEST`) that was obtained in the proceeding step.
```

Author: Updated.

  - [oras attach](#oras-attach)
  - [oras discover](#oras-discover)
- [FAQ](#faq)

## Background

ORAS has prettified output designed for humans. However, for machine processing, especially in automation scenarios, like scripting and CI/CD pipelines, developers want to perform batch operations and chain different commands with ORAS, as well as filtering, modifying, and sorting objects based on the outputs that are emitted by the ORAS command. Developers expect that ORAS output can be emitted as machine-readable text instead of only the prettified or tabular data, so that it can be used to perform other operations.

The formatted output is not intended to supersede the prettified human-readable and friendly output text of ORAS CLI. It aims to provide multiple views and a programming-friendly experience for developers, DevOps engineers, IT professionals who want to automate their workflows without needing to parse unstructured text.

## Guidance

ORAS allows to use `--output` to output a file or directory in the filesystem. To enable users to format the metadata output of ORAS commands and compute figures based on the formatted output, these two options are proposed as follows:

> - Use `--format json|tree|table|go-template='{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. Make `-f` as an alias of `--format`.

Reviewer: Suggest to avoid `'{{` and `}}'` since go template doesn't necessarily need to be surrounded by those.

```suggestion
- Use `--format json|tree|table|go-template=GO_TEMPLATE` to format metadata output of ORAS commands into different formats including prettified JSON, tree, table view, and Go template. It supports computing figures within the template using [Sprig](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) functions. Make `-f` as an alias of `--format`.
```

How docker docs lopks like
```console
'TEMPLATE':         Print output using the given Go template.
```
How kubectl doc looks like:
```console
[[-o | --output]=OUTPUT_FORMAT]

```

Reviewer: > Make `-f` as an alias of `--format`.

`-f` cannot be used as a shortcut since 
1) instinctively it mean `--force`
2) we already use it as `--force` in `manifest/blob delete` commands

Reviewer 5: Doesn't `go-template='{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` makes it more consistent with other tools, and also more familiar for people who use other tools?

Reviewer: @toddysm I am suggesting `--format go-template=GO_TEMPLATE` in this doc. Go template string doesn't necessarily need to be surrounded by `{{` and `}}`. Docker uses `TEMPLATE` and kubectl uses `-o=go-template=<template>`

Author: - Removed the `-f` alias
- Changed `--format go-template='{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to `--format go-template= GO_TEMPLATE` after checking https://pkg.go.dev/text/template

> - Use `--template '{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. This flag can only be used along with `--format <DATA_FORMAT>`.

Reviewer: Same as above
```suggestion
- Use `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to compute and manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen data format. This flag can only be used along with `--format <DATA_FORMAT>`.
```

  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "digest": "sha256:8be4c36a29979c72fdd225654498791fb381a7dd8332ade1981274a16220fe1c",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
  "content": {
    "config": {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
      "size": 2,
    },
    "layers": [
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
        "size": 14477,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
        }
      },
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
        "size": 6639,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
        }
      }
    ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
  }
},
}
```

> - Example: use `--template '{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to manipulate the output data using Go template based on the chosen JSON data format `--format json`.

Reviewer: Do you mean `--format json --template JSME_PATH` or `--format json --template JSON_PATH`?

Also we should promote the usage of `--format go-template=GO_TEMPLATE` as primary in our docs like `kubectl`

Author: I removed this example since this could be a new enhancement in the next iteration as discussed in https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1199#discussion_r1579774298

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json --template '{{ .content.config }}'
```

```json
{
  "digest": "sha256:590382c032d581e30d154bb5c4338d36f417d1649e5d3ae459c90f889d97251c",
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.docker.container.image.v1+json",
  "size": 2608
}
```

> - Example: use `--format go-template` along with `--template '{{ GO_TEMPLATE }}'` to fetch the metadata output and render it with Go template, filter out the `config` data of the manifest:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Example: use `--format go-template` along with `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to fetch the metadata output and render it with Go template, filter out the `config` data of the manifest:
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. The following fields should be outputted:

- `manifests`: the list of referrers
  - `reference`: full reference by digest of the referrer
  - `mediaType`: media type of the referrer
  - `size`: referrer file size in bytes
  - `digest`: digest of the referrer
  - `artifactType`: artifact type of a referrer
  - `annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata in a referrer

See an example:

```bash
oras discover $REGISTRY/$REPO:v1 --format json
```

```json
{
  "manifests": [
    {
      "reference": "$REGISTRY/$REPO@sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8"
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8",
      "size": 964,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T13:48:32Z"
      },
      "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json"
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> The `--format` flag will replace the existing `--output` flag. The `--output` will be marked as "deprecated" in ORAS v1.2.0 and will be removed in the future releases. 

## Feature status

> This feature is marked as experimental in its first iteration since it is still in development and is available in a part of ORAS CLI commands.

Reviewer: Should mention which feature is recommended:
- Recommended (documented and will break): `--format <type>[=<parameters>]`
- Usable (undocumented, easier to use): `--format <type> [--template <parameters>]`
Also, according to our last offline discussion, both `--format` and `--template` are marked as experimental. In later versions, `--format` can be upgraded to `preview`, but `--template` still remain `experimental` or removed.

Author: Added this note in the feature status section

    },
    "layers": [
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
        "size": 14477,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
        }
      },
      {
        "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
        "digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
        "size": 6639,
        "annotations": {
          "org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
        }
      }
    ],
    "annotations": {
      "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
    }
  }
}
```

- Example: use `--format go-template` along with `--template GO_TEMPLATE` to fetch the metadata output and render it with Go template, filter out the `config` data of the manifest:

```bash
oras manifest fetch $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format go-template --template '{{ toPrettyJson .content.config }}'
```

```console
map[digest:sha256:590382c032d581e30d154bb5c4338d36f417d1649e5d3ae459c90f889d97251c mediaType:application/vnd.docker.container.image.v1+json size:2608]

> ```

Reviewer 6: This example output is not in JSON.

Author: Updated

    steps:
      - uses: oras-project/setup-oras@v1
      - run: |
          PATH=`oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format go-template='{{(first .files).path}}'`
          cat $PATH
```

## Proposal and desired user experience

> Enable users to use the `--format` flag to format metadata output into structured data (e.g. JSON) and optionally use the `-template` with the [Go template functions](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template) to manipulate the output data.

Reviewer 6: typo: `-template` --> `--template`. It's double dash.

#### Example: pull multiple files

```shell

> $ oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }} 

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused on what this is supposed to mean because it doesn't work as a cut and paste command
```suggestion
$ oras pull $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json # toPrettyJson
```

Author: Good catch. It should be `--format '{{jsonPretty .}}'`

}
```

> [!NOTE]
> The formatted output of `oras manifest fetch` only supports OCI/Docker Image Manifest in this release. [OCI image index](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc5/image-index.md) and other media types of artifact will be supported in future releases.

## Scenarios

### Scripting

> Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) or  to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.

Reviewer 6: Request proof reading
```suggestion
Alice is a developer who wants to batch operations with ORAS in her Shell script. In order to automate a portion of her workflow, she would like to obtain the image digest from the JSON output objects produced by the `oras push` command and then use shell variables or utilities like [xargs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xargs) to enable an ORAS command to act on the output of another command and perform further steps. In this way, she can chain commands together. For example, she can use `oras attach` to attach an SBOM to the image using its image digest as a argument outputted from `oras push`.
```

```

> [!NOTE]

> > - The formatted output of `oras manifest fetch` only supports OCI/Docker Image Manifest in this release. [OCI image index](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc5/image-index.md) and other media types of artifact will be supported in future releases.

Reviewer 6: @qweeah Technically, it is trivial to support any JSON-based manifest after we supporting json output of image manifests, isn't it?

Reviewer: It is trivial to support known JSON-based manifest types. I am not sure what do you mean by any. E.g. if we are going to support ORAS artifacts(application/vnd.cncf.oras.artifact.manifest.v1+json), then [code of the manifest](https://github.com/oras-project/artifacts-spec/blob/main/specs-go/v1/manifest.go) must be added to ORAS CLI.

```json
{
	"reference": " $REGISTRY/$REPO@sha256:8be4c36a29979c72fdd225654498791fb381a7dd8332ade1981274a16220fe1c",
	"schemaVersion": 2,
	"mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
	"digest": "sha256:8be4c36a29979c72fdd225654498791fb381a7dd8332ade1981274a16220fe1c",
	"artifactType": "application/vnd.unknown.artifact.v1",
	"content": {
		"config": {
			"mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
			"digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
			"size": 2
		},
		"layers": [{
				"mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
				"digest": "sha256:6cb759c4296e67e35b0367f3c0f51dfdb776a0c99a45f39d0476e43d82696d65",
				"size": 14477,
				"annotations": {
					"org.opencontainers.image.title": "sbom.spdx"
				}
			},
			{
				"mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
				"digest": "sha256:54c0e84503c8790e03afe34bfc05a5ce45c933430cfd9c5f8a99d2c89f1f1b69",
				"size": 6639,
				"annotations": {
					"org.opencontainers.image.title": "scan-test-verify-image.json"
				}
			}
		],
		"annotations": {
			"org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-15T09:41:54Z"
		}
	}
}

> ```

Reviewer 6: nit: inconsistent formatting: the indentation are in tabs. should be spaces like other examples.

Author: Fixed

Push an artifact to a repository and show the metadata of the pushed artifact.

```shell

> $ oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG --format json {{ toPrettyJson }}

Author: Good catch. It should be `--format '{{jsonPretty .}}'`

}
```

> [!NOTE]
> When pushing a folder to filesystem, the output fields are the same as the example of pushing files as above.

Push a folder to a repository and filter out the value of `reference` and `artifactType` of the pushed artifact in the standard output.

```bash

> oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG /sample-folder --format '{{.Ref}},{{.MediaType}}'

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
oras push $REGISTRY/$REPO:$TAG sample-folder --format '{{.Ref}}, {{.MediaType}}'
```

    └── sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1
```

View an artifact's referrers manifest in pretty JSON output. The following fields should be outputted:

- `OCI-Filters-Applied`: when the registry supports filtering on `artifactType`, this filed could be displayed
- `Manifests`: the list of referrers
  - `Ref`: full reference by digest of the referrer
  - `MediaType`: media type of the referrer
  - `Size`: referrer file size in bytes
  - `Digest`: digest of the referrer
  - `ArtifactType`: the type of a referrer

>   - `Annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata for the image manifest

Reviewer 6: > [!NOTE]
>The annotations here is not the annotations for the image manifest but the annotations inside the image manifest.

Author: @shizhMSFT How about:
`Annotations`: contains arbitrary metadata of a referrer

Reviewer 6: contains arbitrary metadata *in* a referrer?

Author: Sounds good to me. Updated.

See an example:

```bash
oras discover localhost:5000/hello:v1 --format json
```

```json

> "OCI-Filters-Applied: artifactType": application/vnd.example.sbom.v1

Reviewer 6: What's this? It seems not a part of the JSON object.

Reviewer 6: The `OCI-Filters-Applied` mentioned in the spec is not a part of the HTTP body but a part of the HTTP header.

Author: Removed `"OCI-Filters-Applied`

{
  "Manifests": [
    {
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:0db683b656132cede5360f42bc52541f3386b30ce685e6e63ff93ced54423fb8",
      "Size": 964,
      "Annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T13:48:32Z"
      },
      "ArtifactType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json"
    },
    {
      "MediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
      "Digest": "sha256:476d43120d3799fa76d7706f741beca73f5ff4149c8b6db3bd516a73d4a82fc1",
      "Size": 728,
      "Annotations": {
        "io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256": "[\"792265ec6b22f0a87c7b3d980319d51a76a382de1b7a47bd877bb4e5a9beb637\"]",
        "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2023-12-14T14:41:56Z"
      },
      "ArtifactType": "application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature"
    }
  ]
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The `--format` flag will replace the existing `--output` flag. The `--output` will be marked as "deprecated" in ORAS v1.2.0 and will be removed in the next release. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> The `--format` flag will replace the existing `--output` flag. The `--output` will be marked as "deprecated" in ORAS v1.2.0 and will be removed in the future releases.
```

**Q:** Why ORAS chooses [Go template](https://pkg.go.dev/text/template)?
**A:** Go template is a powerful method to customize output you want It allows users to manipulate the output format of certain commands. It provides access to data objects and additional functions that are passed into the template engine programmatically. It also has some useful libraries that have strong functions for Go’s template language to manipulate the output data, such as [Sprig](https://masterminds.github.io/sprig/).

**Q:** What is the difference of prettified JSON and raw JSON?

> **A:** In the context of ORAS output, raw JSON means display the output of ORAS command in the JSON string format, while prettified JSON means display the output of ORAS command in a pretty format. Only necessary fields will be displayed in the formatted JSON output. See examples in the [oras pull](#oras-pull) section.

Reviewer 6: This answer does not answer me the question, and I'm still confused after reading it.

To me, _raw JSON_ means that `oras` outputs the JSON object as it is returned by the server. _Prettified JSON_ means that `oras` outputs the modified JSON object with whitespace adjusted (i.e. human-friendly indentations and newlines).

Author: Good suggestion!
